# Animal Shelter Model
An attempt at modeling animal shelter data. This approach uses an ensemble of ensembles and other models. A unique feature is a custom predictive model of a Linear Regression Ensemble. This takes in a random number of columns and creates a linear regression on these. It then ensembles this by sampling different columns from the data set..

# Report
The following is my approach, thoughts, and reflections on this project. Overall I spent between 4 days and a week on developing this.
### Preprocessing
Starting off with data cleaning, I got some of the unnecessary columns out of the way. Id and Name are useless in training, since there isn’t any correlation between name and the outcome, and the Id is an arbitrary value assigned to the record. Outcome Time may cause leakage since it provides some information that an incoming animal wouldn’t have, and DOB is basically the same as age but harder to manipulate. For those reasons I removed all those features in their entirety. Then there's some null fields in the records. Since there's only 3 null values across all 111,000 records it's easiest to just drop those records, and since they make up such a small number of the records the impact of their removal is small.

A lot of the following cleaning I hadn't done before creating the Linear Regression Ensemble, which I believe contributed to lower accuracy on this model, which I will discuss later. One reason for this is because a lot of these values would originally be very unique from each other (like the Intake Time), leading to not being able to find a correlation. I say this since when looking at Intake Time, every animal will have a lexicographically unique Intake Time, so when doing One-Hot Encoding each record will have a unique value. Not only would this be not helpful, it would balloon the number of features to an unmanageable level. Because of the issues when tuning the LRE, I realized I needed to do more feature engineering.

I opted to split the Intake Time into many fields because if it is left as is, there won't be any correlation between data points. I chose to split out day, month, year, and hour, as those values would provide more insight than the original. I also believed that each of those on their own may provide certain insights on the final outcome, like perhaps all the animals that came in during a specific hour or day were more likely to have a certain outcome. As well, I changed Age Upon Intake to be the same units for all fields, being days, as it will be easier to interpret that way. Having the field as a mix of days, weeks, months, and years caused the data to be categorical in nature, instead of a range which makes more sense for age. I applied a function to this column to convert each age to the number of days. The way I did this, however, may have caused some fields to become zeroed out, which I should have investigated more than I did. Finally, I changed the Found Location to just be the city/county and state they were found in, as including all the street addresses is much more difficult to deal with, unless you encode it as coordinate data, which I don't want to do. The inclusion of the street data led to it being a similar problem as Intake Time, and dealing with including the street data in a meaningful way was something I felt out of scope for the time I had. Though if I had come up with a way to do that, the results would have probably been better.

### The Plan

The plan is relatively simple. I want to make a bunch of individual classifiers and homogenous ensembles, then combine them together as a heterogeneous ensemble. I'll make a Random Forest and Decision Stump ensemble, and for the rest of the approaches I'll determine whether or not it would make sense to ensemble them. If it does, I'll make an ensemble of them. If not I'll make a single model that will be added to the final ensemble. Also, any models that fall under a certain accuracy I'll cut and not include them. For the interior ensembles, I plan to have a cutoff around 60-65% and for interior individual models I plan to have the cutoff around 90%. The hope is that this will increase the total accuracy with all the models combined. As well, I want to try a lot of approaches and models because I think it'll be a fun experience and be interesting to see how things pan out.

### The Journey

My first idea was making a Linear Regression ensemble. To do this I want to take 2 random features and have them split on subsets of the classifiers. For example one will be `Found Location` and `Intake Condition`, and it'll classify as either `[Died, Adoption]` or `[Return to Owner, Euthanasia, Transfer]`. I think it'll be an interesting approach, and thankfully ChatGPT understands what I'm trying to do, so getting the code to build a custom model is pretty straightforward. Instead of writing all the code in my Main file, I split it off into a separate python file, `linear_regression_ensemble.` After doing some work on building the model, instead of having a random split of what the classifier subsets are, it will be a one vs many approach. As well, because of the way the code is written, the number of features used can increase, so the dimensionality of the Linear Regression can be increased easily. 

Running the LRE with the defaults gets a 49.5% accuracy, which is better than guessing since there’s 7 classes, but is under my target of 60%, so I’ll go straight into hyperparameter tuning. Initially I had a lot more parameters in the parameter grid, but then it was running for 5+ hours and didn’t even finish because my browser went to sleep, so I took it down a notch and it finished much faster. After running the GridSearchCV with the parameters it found as the best estimator parameters I think that accuracy will increase as I increase n_models, but if I increase it too much it may fall in to overfitting, so I decided to run the classifier with `n_models=20` and another with `n_models=30`, and whichever has the best accuracy I would take. After messing around with the parameters more manually on my own, I found that `n_models=35` and `features_per_model=12` seems to get the best result, with around 64%. Since I was able to get this model to over 60% I will add it to the ensemble, but getting to this accuracy caused my original intent for the model to not be what it finally ended up being.

With that amalgamate done, I'll move on to built in functions. The three individual classifiers I'll start with are KNN, Naive Bayes, and SVM. This should be a straightforward process of testing each one and hyper parameter tuning, which will take some time but shouldn't be as crazy as the previous model. Firstly though, I need to normalize the data for these to make sure they don’t break. Because it’s a mix of categoricals and non categoricals I’ll need to both one-hot encode the categoricals and normalize the non categoricals. Thanks to ChatGPT for the function to do so. Looking back, there may have been some problems in this approach. I’m not sure whether I should have normalized first then one-hot encoded, or the other way around. I should have explored this more, however I didn’t think to do so until now which is unfortunate.

Training these three models took a long time because of the hyperparameter tuning, and they all ended up being between 56-60% accurate, which is well below my desires for the individual classifiers. I’ll definitely need to drop my standards if I want to get as many models as I plan to, so these models get a pass for the final ensemble. They’re still above the 50% which is needed when building an ensemble, so they’re technically good enough.

Next I want to train a Neural Net, which I’ve decided to also have as an individual classifier. The process of training all of these models is pretty similar, just changing whether or not to normalize and/or do PCA, and choosing what hyperparameters to test. Because of that there isn’t much to note about this model’s training, and it also ended up being about 61% accurate.

At this point I began to get quite frustrated. All of these models have been about 60% accurate, with the LRE being the best at 64%. These numbers are really not what I want to see, but I had more models to train and not enough time to dive into these previous ones. So I did a Decision Tree as my final individual classifier, getting about 62% accuracy (again), and moved on to training the ensembles, which would become one of the largest time sinks.

The two I chose to do are Random Forest and Decision Stump ensembles as these are the main ones we talked about in class, and they have libraries built in that are easy to use. And despite the many hours of hyperparameter tuning for both these models, they only got ~61% and ~60% respectively. This was really disheartening. Not being able to break the 64% of my LRE, which I had initially written off as what would be my worst model, started to really wear on me. I started to not have as much fun and really wanted to just build the final model in hopes it would have a higher accuracy.

Building this final ensemble was a long process of building the final model, getting an error in either the build process or the final testing process, going back and fixing the error, then repeating. I’m glad I chose to do a Voting Classifier, because although a Stacking Classifier would have probably performed better, it would have taken much longer and the debugging process would have broken me because of the long waits. So finally, after a lot of iteration on the building of the final model, I had a working model and predictions. I had to perform the same data preprocessing on the test data as I had the training data, but since I had built functions to do most of it previously, it was more compact this time. As well, I tried just running the LRE model, and the final ensemble and the LRE performed surprisingly close, which honestly hurt, since that implied all the models I had previously built didn’t do much at all.

### Conclusions

After everything, I recognize there are many places I could improve. The main areas are in preprocessing, data manipulation on a per model basis, and giving myself more time. I did not spend as much time as I could have on the preprocessing and normalization, which would have definitely been beneficial for the accuracy scores. As well, I should have tried to manipulate the data more to fit each model’s needs instead of dropping in the cookie cutter training code and making minor changes. Most importantly though was giving myself more time. A variety of issues came up, both getting sick for a week and work from other classes, and that led to me not committing as much time to this project. And for something like this, time is everything, so if I had given myself more time to commit, I would have been able to ameliorate the other issues that came up, but instead I found myself rushing to have results at the end.
